on Tuesday when I explained this stuff I
I'm motivated by by the job by the
geometric aspects of directional
derivatives and graphs and tangent lines
and tangent lines so now I want to start
with sort of a slightly different and
which is uh just one of the applications
of this of this technique in other words
where what is it what is the real-life
situation where we might be interested
in finding directional derivatives and I
explained last time the directional
derivative is just it's just a fancy
term for for the rate of change and so
here is a typical example which you may
have already seen in the book or in your
section work which is a imagine a
mountain imagine a mountain okay and
then there is the ocean somewhere next
to it and the beach but we'll talk about
this later focus focus on the mountain
so now okay this is the mountain now if
I draw it like this it's not clear it's
not clear whether it is the mountain or
just a curve right so I'm in order to
give it an illusion of 3d or
three-dimensional picture what I usually
do as the reflex and what you would
normally do or when you read the book
what you see there is that you draw some
curves on it you're kind of trying to
give it a three-dimensional feel right
so my first point is what are what are
this what are these curves these are the
level curves so that's the first thing I
want to say which of course is sort of
I've said it before but I just want to
emphasize it one more time even to
visualize this three-dimensional object
on the plane we find it very convenient
very useful to imagine not just the
contour the general contour of this
object but this collection of of curves
which are kind of parallel to each other
what are they where they just obtained
by taking the section of the mountain by
by parallel planes by by parallel
horizontal planes which are parallel to
the floor to the ground ok that's what
they are well in fact I have drawn just
the visible part the visible parts of
those curves right there is also
backside of for each curve for example
this one also has a backside but we
don't see it unless it's a transparent
object we don't see it so so that's why
usually indicate like this right so so
each of them is actually has a sort of
the second half which is behind which we
don't see and this we also don't see
when we look at the actual mountain but
when we try to draw draw the picture
then we you know we draw this ok so
that's the first point so the second
point is what what is it what does it
have to do with directional derivatives
Direction derivative is the rate of
change so change of what so in this
particular setting it's there is a very
good good example of this which is that
suppose if there is somebody here on
this mountain who is the quote with
climbing it okay so there's a climber
and so the climber wants to decide which
which way they should go to and
depending on which way they go what will
be the rate of the you know how steep
will be the client will the climb be
that's the question so the rate of
change will be here the rate of its
altitude change he is a her altitude
change right and the higher the rate the
steeper is the is the climb in case we
are going towards the top of the
mountain or the steeper the descent if
we're going down and you know likewise
the smaller the rate of change the
smaller is is that the skip miss so how
do we measure this the point is that
there isn't a single number there isn't
a single number to give us to give us
the steepness of the climb because the
climber could go in many different
directions and for each direction there
is a particular steepness rate for
instance the climber may be tired and
doesn't want to climb anymore
so in that case the climber could just
go along the along the level curve so
then the altitude of the climber the
height of this point over the sea level
will not change at all so then the the
rate of change or the steepness level is
zero steepness rate is zero right so
that's one possibility that will
correspond to going in this direction
but on the other hand a climber could go
could choose the most the steepest path
which would actually be if you think
about it just intuitively you could
guess that it should be something which
is perpendicular to the level curve and
in fact this is something that we have
confirmed by calculation and I will I
will go over it one more time in a
couple minutes so in that case the rate
of change is is the highest possible so
in this direction in this direction the
rate of change is zero in this direction
the rate of change is maximal
and and if we go if we go in the
direction which is perpendicular to the
level curve what we go down then it's
going to be minimal as small as possible
well it's absolute value still going to
be the highest possible but it's going
to be have a negative sign so it is the
number it will be the smallest possible
value so here rate is minimum okay
and so the way we the way we so in order
to talk about the rate of change you
have to choose the direction that's why
is the directional derivative it's not
there isn't a single derivative for a
function two variables but there is a
there is a whole variety of derivatives
derivative is determined by the choice
of the direction okay so what are the
variables here which variables am i
talking about well the variables are
somewhere here so there is a let's
actually dude let's do it on this board
because I don't want to mess up the
picture so I I want to draw the
coordinate system and let's say this
this Plateau this display in XY plane is
the sea level and the Z Z then will
correspond to the height to the altitude
above the sea level
now our point there is the projection
onto the plane and so the on the plane
it has coordinates x and y or maybe x0
y0 to emphasize that these are some six
numbers so these are the coordinates of
the this correspond to the position of
the climber and see the point is the
climber is in space right so up a priori
the climber has three coordinates XY and
z but because the climber is not flying
you know he's not jumping with a
parachute he is he's on the mountain
because he's on the mountain as as soon
as we know the XY coordinates we know
the the Z coordinate unless the mountain
the shape which sort of comes back right
that normally mount normal mountain for
a normal amount is not going to happen
right so then the G coordinate is
actually determined by the XY
coordinates that's why the only
parameters here are x and y and not not
XY and z in fact you can think of this
of this of the surface as a graph of a
function graph represents the mount okay
and so now when we talk about the
direction we can think about the
direction as being the direction on the
mountain but we can also think about the
XY plane and so in other words what we
can do is we can draw up the level curve
down here and it's not going to look
exactly the same because I kind of
magnify I have kind of magnified the
picture compared to the picture there
this is not this is bigger I have used a
different scale for the bottom picture
as opposed to the top picture so the the
level curve will look like an ellipse
but I have I have magnified it and we
scale the tool to make it make it bigger
so that it's easier to draw so then the
the directions which we have talked
about here are the following this one is
both parallel to the level curve that's
the direction along the XY plane or in
the XY plane which would correspond to
the movement on the mountain parallel to
the to the level curve this is the
direction on the XY plane which will
correspond to to the path of steepest of
steepest ascent for which the rate is
maximum and this will be the direction
for which the for which the the rate
will be minimal so it is what we call
the rate of steepest descent
now I would like to draw this vectors
actually to be of in such a way that
they are of the same of the same length
because they are supposed to be unit
vectors this is a convention we agree
from the beginning that we will measure
directions by unit vectors okay and the
point is that this are perpendicular so
what are so what are what are these
vectors this again is a barrel of a
vector parallel to the to the level
curve and this vector is bourbon is a
vector perpendicular to the level curve
and this is what we discussed last time
I mean both of these vectors are
perpendicular to them to the level curve
and the the one which corresponds to the
heat steepest ascent is the one which
which is the gradient vector so this is
actually the gradient vector so this is
not level because this is to get the
cipa this steepest ascent you have to go
inside
inside this this level curve right
because you go to the stores the center
of the mountain and this one will crease
will be negative obedient and the point
is that we I explained last time why
this gradient vectors gradient vector is
actually perpendicular to the tangent
vector or in other words perpendicular
to the to the tangent line to the level
curve this is some calculation which
involves the knowledge of equations for
lines on the plane okay so that's the
picture but in principle there are many
other directions we can also drawn we
can also draw a direction like this say
again some unit vector U which would be
a B which will have two coordinates a
and B and if the climber goes in this
direction
then her path would be would go along
that and it will correspond to some some
paths on the mountain but like this
which is neither the steepest ascent nor
the steepest descent nor is it is it a
parallel to the slope you see in this
case it goes down because the the vector
points outward so this direction or more
precisely this line which contains this
vector will correspond on the mountain
to some specific path which starts at
this point and then go somewhere okay
and what we are calculating is just the
slope of that of that curve of that path
so the directional derivative
[Music]
directional derivative this view F my 0
with respect to this vector U is the
slope of of the path on the mountain one
on the graph corresponding to this
corresponding to 2 the line containing
you
see this is the line I'm talking about
this yellow line I didn't draw it very
well maybe it's more like it more it
goes like this so if I look at this line
this line will give me will give me that
path what do I mean by give me if I lift
that bad there's a path on the on the on
the plane on the XY plane but it has a
unique lift to the graph this is the
yellow path on the graph in other words
this line or this half line is the
projection of that path there is a
unique path on the mountain which starts
at that point and whose projection on to
the XY plane is the half line directed
by you is easy what I mean are there any
questions about this okay so so the
point is that the graph is
two-dimensional it's a surface but once
you choose the direction you cut a path
or a curve on that surface so you are
back to one dimension to the one
dimensional case and in the one
dimensional case you can actually talk
about the slope because you get the
graph of a function one variable namely
the variable along this line and you can
talk about each slope that slope is the
rate of change along that path that's
what we call the directional derivative
and finally we have a formula for it
which involves the gradient vector
which involves the gradient vector and
this formula tells us when this
directional derivative is take some
particular values for example the
maximum value maximum value corresponds
to u equal Nala
minimum value is its opposite and the
zero value responds to the tangent to
the tangent to the U which is tangent to
level curve okay but these were already
knew from just from by analyzing this
picture just on the grounds of common
sense we didn't need to to do any
calculation to figure this out in fact
when you are climbing the mountain you
are not pulling out a paper pad and a
pen and texturing code to calculate what
what is the what is the best way to
reach the top of the mountain you kind
of fold your intuition and what your
intuition will always tell you is that
if you want to go in if you want to
reach the top in the best in the fastest
possible way you have to go
perpendicular to this to the level curve
in the direction perpendicular to the
level curve and likewise if you want to
go down the fastest way you also go
through particular to the level curve is
that clear
okay so intuitively it's clear but now
we have proved it because we found a
formula for the rate of change and from
this formula with written in terms of
dot product it's plain obvious when it
takes the maximum value the minimum
value or the zero value and that was one
of the main conclusions last time but
now I have illustrated it in this way
okay
so now one more oh that's odd here's the
problem
let's go catch-22 alright so I have just
a small inconvenience well that's very
clever I will not try to get it out of
there because you know it I don't want
to put the second one so yes what is
that what is that symbol
it's called nabla it's a Greek letter
which is written opposite to Delta but
we're using it for the gradient I'm
sorry that's right this is a notation
for the gradient okay so and one other
thing which I wanted to mention in this
regard is we talked about equations of
we have talked about equations of
tangent lines and tangent planes and I
know that this could be confusing
because you have you have many different
objects at the same time for which you
can look at tangent lines and tangent
planes seems like that many different
discussions cleaner the same time okay
let's focus okay so the tangent lines
and tangent plane and so I just wanted
to summarize the stuff once more so that
so that there is no ambiguity there's no
confusion so the first is the two
variable case two variable case in two
variable case we look at the so we look
at the level curve of a function f of X
Y so it is given by this equation XY
equals K so that's this level curve
that's this curve of equal height or
equal altitude which I do which I drew
over there okay and so then we can look
at the tangent line tangent line to this
curve and the equation of the tangent
line at the point x0 y0 is like this
it's f sub x at x 0 y 0 times x minus x0
plus F sub y you know y0 times y minus
y0 cause you okay but in fact we can try
we can now look at at the case of three
variables as well right so let me
actually let me do it here three
variables three variable case in three
variable case we would want to take
instead of a function in two variables f
of XY we want we would want to take a
function may be f capital a function on
three variables X Y Z and by analogy we
would have to look at at the level but
not curve now level surface level
surface of this function and so that
would be f of X Y Z equals K oh maybe I
should say the key is some number using
so that's for example in the in this in
this discussion key would be the height
so I don't know 1,000 feet where is x
and y and z are variable so that's the
difference it's an equation it's one
equation for three variables because in
this equation this is some number like
1000 so then you can ask what is the
equation of the tangent but now not line
but plane to to this to the graph to
this for the surface at the point x0 y0
and z0 and you see the point is that the
answer is given by something which looks
exactly the same except now we have
three variables so we have to add one
more term which involves the third
variable Z so what the answer is the
answer is the following you have to take
the partial derivative let's like to X
multiplied by X minus x0 plus the
partial derivative there 2y plus the
partial derivative respect to Z now also
so the difference between the two
variable case and the three variable
case is that we now have an extra
variable so everything gets dimension
one higher that dimensions get get get
bumped by one we have the curve now we
have a surface we had a line now we have
a plane the equation here involves two
partial derivatives have had this very
simple form and now the equation
involves all three partial derivatives
but has the same form okay so I will not
derive this formula it is derived in the
same way as in this case in the case of
two variables but yeah it's sort of I
hope it looks convincing to you because
you can clearly see the analogy and in
fact if you want to prove it you can
prove it in exactly the same way now
what is slightly confusing in this is
because the is that there is a special
case of this three variable of the three
variable picture and the special case is
the special case is when f of XY Z is f
of XY minus G so you can ask wise why
would we even bother to look at this
special case and the reason is very
simple because in this special case if I
look at the equation f of XY Z equals
zero which is a special case of a level
surface namely the case when K is 0
right this is just the equation Z equals
f of XY and this equation defines a
graph graph of the function in two
variables so it's kind of funny that
function in two variables shows up in
two different contexts it shows up here
in the context of level curves ok but it
also can show up here for functions in
three variables even though it is a
function of two variables but even when
we have a function two variables and we
think about graphs we automatically go
to freedom to the three-dimensional
situation right and so the graph of a
function in two variables can be thought
of as a level surface for a function in
three variables which function well this
function f of XY minus z kind of a
simple concoction you can make out of f
and the new variable z so we can apply
this general formula for the tangent
plane to this special case and what do
we get let's let's observe that f sub x
is just a small sub x because when you
take partial derivative of this function
v f you have to differentiate this one
that will be just observe X and you
differentiate this one but this one is
independent of X so this doesn't change
anything so the partial derivative of
the function of this function of this
whole function with respect to X is just
the partial derivative of this
so it is small apps of it large so
derivative respect to Y is f sub y
partial derivative X to Z is what
negative 1 it's negative 1 because
that's the derivative of this function
negative V with respect to Z this guy
doesn't depend on Z so it it's partial
derivative back to Z 0 but the partial
derivative this term is negative 1 so we
get this 3 partial derivatives which we
substitute into this formula and what do
we get we get F sub X of X 0 y 0 times X
minus x0 plus F sub X 0 y 0 y minus y 0
minus Z minus Z 0 ok equal 0 and now we
recognize the equation of the tangent
plane to the graph which we have known
already this is the one which we got
already two weeks ago when we talk about
differentials and linear approximation
the only difference is that now I put
negative Z minus Z 0 on the left hand
side but in our old discussion we would
write equals Z minus Z 0 and then we
would switch the left and right hand
sides to but that's a minor issue right
so this is just a slightly different
form of writing the same equation just
putting everything on one side and now
you see that the case of graphs of the
case of tangent planes of graphs of
functions in two variable can be thought
of in two different ways ok namely you
can think that you started with a
function in two variables and you just
look at the graph and you look at the
tangent plane but you can also think of
it as a special case of the more general
case of functions in three variables
except you take as a function 3 where
was this very special form f of XY minus
G in either way you approach it you get
the same answer but now you can
appreciate more the connection between
this answer and this many people asked
me after last lecture why when we go
when we look at the equation of the
tangent line
function in two variables it's as though
we are dropping the storm v- d zero so
there is this negative one in the which
we just drop well
geometrically it's clear in fact my mind
bought the board stay stated since
tuesday
so i guess nobody like this slow small
board except for me which is good so
this is this is the tangent line and
this tangent line corresponds along this
tangent line to the level curve we have
the same value of Z Z equals Z zero so
that's why we drop this term to go from
this equation to this so you can get
this equation from this by dropping Z
minus Z 0 because the YZ equal to Z zero
along the level curve but also you can
now understand that this formula is a
special case of the formula for the
tangent plane to the general level
surface which actually looks like this
one which actually looks like this one
except we have a third variable in the
special case when the function is like
this this third term becomes extremely
simple it just gets coefficients
negative 1 so you just get minus D minus
e 0 ok and to make the analogy complete
let's actually look at the level let's
fill in this square you know it's like
when you do IQ test I've never done it
done but I know it's easy to define to
find them online and I think the problem
is often like fill in the square so this
is exactly the kind of question here
what should be here right in other words
this is the case of three variables and
we find this is a special case of that
right now what's the crease what's the
analogous special case for functions in
two variables that's the case when when
this function of two variables special
case when this f of X Y is some function
in one variable which called G of X
minus y
and so you see in this case in fact you
know what I'm going to do to make it to
make it look more like like an analogy
let's actually that's the position your
position the board there we go so now I
think it's more clear what I mean by
filling in square I want to find a
special case of this which is analogous
to how we found the special case of
three variables and that's the case when
now our function in two variables is
equal to another function in one
variable
- why okay in this case the equation f
of XY equals zero means y equals G of X
right and this is a graph graph of the
function G of X so I level so a level
curve for a function of two variables
can be a can become the graph of a
function one variable when this function
in two variables has this special form
if you have a question good question so
what would happen if we put some K right
if you put some K then it would be here
- I would put minus K right so then I
could just absorb K into the definition
of the function G of X if I redefine my
function G of X by subtracting K then I
would get back the level zero so that's
why we don't lose any generality by
looking at the case of level zero rather
than and post the general case so that's
let's just look at the case of level
zero okay so that's a graph and so now
this formula for the tangent line now
that F sub X of X Y now is G prime of X
just like here the partial derivatives
of the big function f respect to X & Y
were just the derivatives of the small F
and now the role of the small F is
played by G so the partial derivative
like this is just G prime and the
partial derivative respect to the second
variable is negative 1 again because
this is minus y now plays the same role
as minus G played here so when we take
the derivative we get negative 1 so now
this formula for the tangent line
becomes G prime of X 0 times X minus X 0
minus y minus y 0 equals 0 let me
rewrite this this is equivalent to
saying Y is equal to F prime of X 0
times X minus X 0 plus y 0 we recover
the old formula for the tab for the
equation of the tangent line to the
graph of function one variable that
formula that form is exactly this one
right the slope is f prime you multiply
X minus x0 and you add the value of the
function at at the point X 0 which is y
0 right so there is nothing mysterious
in this formulas in this special in this
special case we get back the old formula
we've known all along
and also this now shed some new light on
this coefficient negative 1 which many
of you have found mysterious it's not
mysterious is this every serious as this
coefficients negative 1 which shows up
in the old formula for the tangent line
to the graph we were not surprised to
write the formula for the graph of the
function is y equals f prime times you
know in this form but if you have it in
this form it is it you can but you can
rewrite it like this now when you write
it like this you find the coefficient
negative 1 that's exactly the reason the
tears is the same reason why this
negative 1 empty
okay any questions about this yes why do
we choose a special case that's a very
good question why do we even choose the
special case well from the point of view
let's talk about this game from the
point of view of functions in two
variables this sounds strange why would
you write it like this and not f of X
minus XY or something right so from
point of view functions of two variables
it doesn't make any sense it makes how
makes a lot of sense however from the
point of view of the theory of functions
in one variable when we study functions
in one variable we would like to
visualize them by graphs right when we
draw a graph of function one variable we
introduce one more variable and we look
at the graph which is y equals f of X
what I'm saying now is that within this
formula isn't formalism that we are
developing we can think of the graph of
G of X which normally we would write as
y equals G of X just in this form and
when we write it in this form we never
say the word level curve or anything
like this which is a graph but we have
to realize it's important to realize to
see the connection between different
formulas it's important to realize that
this graph actually can be thought of as
a level curve for a function in two
variables and that function just happens
to give this function even though it
looks kind of if there's no reason a
priori to study such functions we have
introduced them because we started from
the point of view of functions in one
variable and then this will naturally
fill out once we started to look at the
graph so that's it likewise in this case
ok yes
that's right it could be a point or
finitely many points because you could
be let's look at the function and for a
good reason right if the dimension of
the level curve is going to be the
number of variables our level curve or
level surface and so on would be the
number of variables involve minus 1 if
you have two variables it's a level
curve so dimension one there are three
variables it's a level surface dimension
two if it's a function one variable it
will be of dimension zero and here
dimensional objects are just collections
of points and the way it works is it's
just like this let's look at for example
if you have a parabola the level curve
consists of two points but you know if
you have a cubic parabola like this
there will be three points and if you
have a cosine you will actually have
infinitely many points instantly many
points if the level is between 0 & 1 and
negative 1 and if the level is higher
than 1 or lower than negative 1 and it
will be empty level curve could be empty
or level surface in this case the sort
of level point we don't have a good word
for for for a collection of points so
it's like level level zero zero
dimensional object manifolds are as a
mathematician would call it any other
questions classes yes
oh yes I'm sorry this would thank you
this is just a TT mistake thank you yeah
it's your pride of course I mean I'm
just saying this hormone becomes this
formula but I call the G right sorry
yeah yeah I completely messed it up all
right good job
okay so that so that's that that will do
it for us in this topic and actually we
are running running out of time so we
need to talk about something else today
also I really wanted to go over the
slowly to emphasize the the connection
between these different objects because
I think that there are different
dimensions and different number of
variables at play and it could be very
confusing but I think that if you put
this in school in this sort of in this
picture where you have this four squares
two variable case three variable case
special case into their specialties in
three variables and I think it becomes
much more clear all right but the next
topic we'll talk will discuss is
concerns finding maximum minimum
functions
and as it's always the case
it's actually instructive to look at
this question already in the
one-dimensional in one variable case
because we already can gain some insight
into the problem by looking at this very
special simple the simplest possible
case if you have a function in one
variable it's a natural it's a natural
question to ask where this function
attains maximum and minimum values
that's important because this function
could respond to something in real life
and you may want to maximize that or
minimize that and so the first point I
want to first point I want to emphasize
is there are two different types of
maxima and minima the local and the
global or absolute the global ones are
called absolute I will I but I'd like to
think local global kind I like this
terminology this denotes a little bit
better so what do I mean by local so let
me let me draw this for function one
variable it is very convenient to
analyze everything by using graphs of
functions and graphs again our curves on
the plane right so we introduce to use a
new variable Y and we write a graph as
if given by the equation y equals s of s
so so let's look at this let's look at
this kind of function that's a very
typical example so I'm going to focus on
this point
so clearly this point the value of the
function at this point so this would be
the point X 0 and that's the value of
the function this is f of X 0 the value
of this function at this point is
greater than the value at at nearby
points so that's an example of local
maximum
in me a point is the local maximum if
there is a small neighborhood of this
point such that if you restrict your
function to this neighborhood which is
the same this little interval in this
case then this function will this will
be the maximum value on the interval
okay but either the global maximum
clearly not because I have a point here
for example x1 for which the value is
higher so that's not a global maximum
that's not a global maximum either in
fact in this example there is no global
maximum because I'm assuming that the
function keeps growing keeps increasing
as X is increasing okay if that's the
case there is no global maximum so
global maximum is that is the completely
different finding global maximum is a
completely different game than finding a
local maximum final local maximum just
involves analyzing the function on on a
very small interval around this point
finding global one sort of involves
analyzing all points in your domain the
way I phrased the question so far I have
phrased the question so far is as though
we were studying global maximum on the
entire in on the entire line on the
entire x line okay and you see clearly
that that question often doesn't have an
answer in other words there is no global
maximum simply because for any point
there will be another point which will
have a higher value higher value higher
value and so on okay so go find the
question of finding global Maxima it is
better it's better to phrase on the
mains which are bounded not on the
entire line but on bounded domains
bounded means that is finite so it's
better to say what is the maximum of
this function on this interval
okay this is an example of a closed
bounded domain in the following sense
first of all it's bounded because it's
finite it doesn't go to infinity
second it is closed because it contains
the endpoints and this is at a kind of
domains that we should look at if we
want if you want to to ask questions
about global Maxima or absolute maxima
minima so let's look at this question in
this particular case in this particular
case we see that the maximum value is
actually taken it is taken at this point
this is the maximum so now you can
appreciate why you have to include the
endpoint if we did not include the
endpoint there wouldn't be a maximum
because no matter how close you are to
this point there will be another point
even closer for which the value would be
even higher so therefore there will be
no maximum right so in order to
guarantee that you have a positive
answer to the question of existence of
maximum or minimum for that matter you
should really look at closed and bounded
intervals and then what happens is that
the maximum can be attained either at
the boundary which is the keys here or
it could be some local maximum which
lies in the interior of this interval in
this particular case you do have a
candidate you do have a candidate for a
maximum this one because it is a local
maximum and it is within this interval
but it's not it's not a global maximum
on this interval because the value of
this function is just bigger but if I if
I were to take a different interval if I
were to take an interval like this for
example okay then this guy would win
because at the boundary the value would
be smaller you see but the boundary the
value will be smaller so this guy would
have the highest possible value on this
interval so the bottom line that the
upshot of all this
is that the absolute maximum can be
found in the finite set of points and
those points are first of all the end
points and all the points where you have
potentially local maximum minimum so the
global maximum on the interval on a
bounded interval on a closed interval
bounded interval let's call it a B can
be found maximum of some function f at
one of the following points one of the
following points the end points which
are a B and the points of potential
local maximum
and here it's important to emphasize the
word potential and those are the points
for which f prime of X is zero because
certainly if it's a point of local
maximum then the slope of the tangent
line at this point is going to be zero
right because if you have a non zero
slope just move away from this point and
you'll get a bigger or smaller value on
one side bigger than one letter size
smaller so the only way you can have a
possible possibly have a local maximum
is to have slope 0 and slope with the
derivative so that's why it's why that's
why these are the points for which the
derivative is equal to 0 ok
so this is the first statement that I
want you to remember or remember from
the recall perhaps from the nonverbal
codes which is that if you look if
you're looking for global maximum what
you need to do is simply measure or
evaluate the value of the function at
the end points
well evaluate at this point evaluate at
this point next find all the points
where the derivative is 0 and evaluate
the function so you get a finite list
and then just stick the one or the one
where the value is maximum these are the
values these are the Maxima of this
function on this interval in other words
you don't have to look through all the
points on the interval there instantly
many but you only look at the end points
and the points where F prime is equal to
0 that's the algorithm for finding
maximum maximum of a function and
likewise for minima just replace the
word minimum by maximum by minimum so
exactly the same now there so before I
go and generalize it to the to the case
of two two variables I want to explain
what I mean by the word potentially
potential local maximum in other words
if you if the point X is the local
maximum
or minimum then the derivative is zero I
already explained this because the slope
has to be zero if it's a maximum minimum
slope has to be zero if the slope is non
zero it means you can increase or
decrease the value by moving a little
bit away from the point so this is true
but this is not true this is not true in
other words the if you the derivative of
your function at your point is zero it
doesn't mean it's an absolute maximum or
minimum and the reason is the following
it reason for that is the following it
is a very simple counter example to this
namely function X cubed so f of X is X
cubed F prime is 3x squared and so f
prime of 0 is 0
which we see right we do see that that
the slope at 0 is 0
right but is the point of a local
maximum or minimum it's not because if
you go this way it increases and if you
go that way it decreases right and in
fact if you think in terms so if you
think in terms of monomials the same
thing will happen if you have X to the 2
the odd to the N where n is odd like 3 5
7 and so on because the derivative of X
to the N is n times 6 and minus 1 so
it's - it's always 0 for this function
but if n is odd then for positive x this
value is both different so negative x is
negative so it's going to
look like this but if X is if if what if
we should have YF to the N where n is
even so it's 2 4 and so on then it's
going to look like this instead and so
in that case it is okay it is actually
point of local maximum minimum local
maximum in this case and if it were
negative it would be local so it is
minimum but well like this would be
maximum so in other words there are
there are many possible scenarios where
where you have a derivative equals 0 and
it is the maximum and there are many
scenarios where the derivative is zero
but it's not the maximum or minimum okay
so it only goes this way if it is
maximum minimum then the drift for 0
that's why I said those are the points
which potentially could be maximum
minimum okay so in principle you could
rule rule some some of them out from the
outset by saying what this points are
actually f prime is zero but the point
is not maximum minimum so then it cannot
possibly contribute to the list of
suspicious points or candidates for
global maximum minimum but I think it's
just much easier to to just take all of
them because it could be finally many
and just evaluate your function f with
all of them and then compare where do
you get the largest value where you get
the smallest value you guys following
this okay good so so that's why the way
I formulated this I didn't want to at
this level to try to differentiate
between the ones which are actually
maximum minima and which are not
I just said look let's look at all which
are potentially maximum e okay so that's
the one-dimensional case and now in some
sense we already know everything we need
to know because in the two dimensional
case is going to look exactly the same
the the criteria the criterion will be
slightly slightly more complicated
maybe I'll say one more thing which is
that there is a criterion to to see
whether the function is a maximum
minimum in this case namely suppose that
f prime is 0 but F double Prime at F
double Prime at this point let me
emphasize that it's a particular point
x0 which was which was the point zero in
my previous example but let's call it x0
this is positive then it's then it's a
maximum it's a minimum sorry minimum
local mean and if I see but to the N if
F prime of x0 is 0 and F double prime of
x0 is less than 0 then it's a local
minimum in other words if you think
about this in terms of Taylor series you
can you can approximate it oftentimes
you can approximate the function by it's
a smooth function by Taylor series and
the first terms on the Taylor series are
going to be given by the value of the
function then the derivative and then
the second derivative so the point is
that if the first derivative vanishes
that's the nasty conditions to have a
local maximum minimum but then it
depends on which term in the Taylor
series is nonzero next so for example if
the second term is non zero that means
your function looks like X minus x0
squared times some times some
coefficient right what I'm trying to say
what I'm trying to explain is the
following let me do it slow more slowly
the Taylor series looks like this
okay so this is just the value of the
function let's assume without loss of
generality that it is equal to zero I
mean after all we can just subtract this
value from this side it's not going to
change anything so let's just assume
that this is zero so the next comes this
term which is the first derivative and
the first derivative has to vanish
otherwise it can't be a maximum minimum
as we just discussed so this also
vanishes so the next term is the second
derivative times X minus x0 squared and
and then we put some additional terms
but the additional terms are negligible
compared to this term when X is very
close to x0 so you might as well replace
your function by this function but this
function is just a parabola I mean the
graph of this function is just a
parabola and the parabola we know a
parabola would be like this if the
coefficient is positive and it would be
like this if the coefficient is negative
right so in this case clearly this is a
local minimum for this one and for this
one is a local maximum and the other
terms don't matter so that's the reason
why we get this criterion but if it is
zero if this term is also 0 then we
can't really tell because we don't we
don't know what what comes next
if the next nonzero term is say cubic
term we know it's not going to be
maximum minima because we looked at the
cubic parabola and it's like this it
doesn't have a maximum minimum right but
if it's if the cubic one vanishes by the
quadratic one is nonzero then again it's
good it's a good shape it's a u-shape
right so there is no telling we should
really then look at higher terms in the
expansion and that's much more difficult
so that's why we just we just stop here
we say well here's the criteria if the
first derivative is zero by secondary is
positive its local minimum and in this
case it's a local maximum and we just
stop right there in other words it's not
it does not exhaust
possible cases but it exhausts its
concerns or helps us in the cases when
the second derivative is non zero and
there is a similar there is a similar
criterion also it for functions in two
variables so now we switch to functions
in two variables I know I wrote what on
the top of what oh they're both local
minima Wow
it's kind of pessimistic thank you
I have to correct difference we should
correct that otherwise looks like the
net will never reach maximum okay I
think now it's good right because if
it's negative it's a shape like this so
it is maximal
[Applause]
okay so now switch the functions in two
variables so again we have local things
local maxima and minima and global ones
and I'm searching for them is sort of
two different games for this for four
local maxima and minima the first step
step one is to check that the two
partial derivatives are 0 just like for
functions in one variable the first step
is to look at the first derivative well
now we have function function in two
variables so there are two different
partial derivatives so both of them have
to vanish in order for us to have a
local maximum minimum well I'm assuming
now that both of them exist there is a
there is another possibility which is
that say one of them may not exist and
in that case that's that's also a
possible case for local maxima minima
but let's assume in the image discussion
that the partial derivatives always
exist so then we don't have to worry
about this if they do exist then a given
point x0 y0 will be a local maximum or
minimum only if the two partial
derivatives those partial derivatives
vanish so when you kind of narrow down
your search you first have to you throw
everything away everything else away you
just keep the points for which both
parts of the rules are zero but this
does not guarantee it does not guarantee
that it is maximum or minimum just like
in the one variable case the best we can
do is to have a criterion involving
second partial derivatives and so the
criterion we would like to say something
like if the second if the second
derivative is positive it's the minimum
if it's negative it's a maximum but that
there are now three different per second
partial derivatives we have F sub xx F
sub XY and F sub YY okay so in fact the
rule is always as follows we have to
calculate the following expression so
remember when we did when we did cross
products we use determinants so let's
make a let's make a determinant of this
2 by 2 matrix which is very easy to
memorize think of the access think of
this one is pointing to the first thing
in depth and and this in the roads look
respond to the first index so first
index here is X and here is y and the
colons will correspond to the second
index which will be you know here is the
X and here is y so you put for possible
partial derivatives in this matrix then
of course we know bike by chlorosis
theorem that this is the same as list
but let's not let's not yet worry about
this this is just an easy way to
remember ok and then we take the
determinant of this so what's the
determinant if F FX X FY y minus F XY f
YX but f YX is equal to ever okay now we
remember it now we remember M just put
square so let's call this D
so the criterion is that it both partial
derivatives are zero and G is greater
than zero then it's a maximum that's
number one number two if both partial
derivatives are zero and D is negative
then it's a minimum and finally I'm
sorry I'm not saying it correctly it's
max no no no no no no sorry sir
it's worse it's worse than that it's
maximum or minimum then this one is not
let's just say not I don't have enough
space but it's not a maximum not a
minimum if it's negative and if it is
zero it's inconclusive don't know okay
so first point think of this as an
analogue of this rule because in the
case of one variable there is also a
rule which involves the second
derivative however this rule is much
more complicated because there are three
different partial derivatives of
second-order and we make some
complicated combination of them where
here we just took the second partial
derivative on the nose and we just said
looked whether it's positive or negative
but it's very there is an analogy
between the two clearly because this is
second this involves second partials and
this involves second partial derivatives
okay now but it looks very mysterious
why do I make this why do I look at this
combination and not as other
combinations to understand this think of
the case where think of the case of
parabola of analogue of the parabola
because I explained to you how this rule
came about by looking at the parabolas
right the parabola because the parabola
approximate
it your your graph right just because of
the Taylor expansion argument you can
see that parabola are going to
approximate your graph near the point of
where the first parts of the root is
first derivative vanish right so think
about the parabolas and in the case of
the parabola you know that if it's an
elliptic first of all parabola now
becomes paraboloid but there are two
types of paraboloid there is an elliptic
paraboloid and is a hyperbolic
paraboloid okay and just look at the
examples of elliptic paraboloid and you
will see that politic paraboloid the
first condition will be satisfied and
for hyperbolic paraboloid the second
condition will be satisfied so if V is
equal to so let's say f of X Y is x
squared plus y squared plus dy square
okay so what are the derivatives in this
case FX s is 2 a is 2 a it is 2a right
FY y is to be right and FX y 0 so there
is a simplification in this case that
there is no cross term ok so this matrix
looks like this is 2a 2b and that's for
a B that's the D in this case so to say
that these positive means to say that
both a be a positive or both of them are
negative
[Applause]
if both a B are positive it's going to
look like this right if both a and B are
negative is going to look like this
right so in this case it's a local
minimum in this case the local maximum
and that but in both cases you see a be
both positive a be both negatives the
combination a times B or for a times B
it in both cases is positive so that's
why we get into the first condition in
the situation of the first condition
where G is positive so we can in this
case we can say for sure it's maximum or
minimum but we cannot say which one so
we have to look at it more closely okay
and what if D is negative if D is
negative that means that a B have
different signs and in this case so a
good example of this would be x squared
minus y squared and that's a hyperbolic
paraboloid
and for a hyperbolic paraboloid I drew
this picture before it looks like a
saddle and on a saddle from there is a
point from which you could either
increase the function if you go along
one of the parabolas which goes up which
opens up this way or you can also
decrease the function by traveling on a
different parabola perpendicular one
where it opens up a downward right so
this point clearly this point on the
saddle is not it's not the point of
maximum minimum so that is the
explanation of this criterion in the
case of quadratic functions functions
which are
combinations of x squared + y squared
and the point is that all other
functions can be reduced to this ones by
a certain procedure and that's how you
get this rule okay
so that that's how we get this rule for
local maximum minimum and that takes
care of that of that issue and the last
remaining topic that is how to find the
absolute maximum minimum differend upon
particular domains and this I will
illustrate very quickly by by a concrete
example let's step one and this is step
two okay let me give you an example of
how to how to find maximum minima global
maximum minimum I just have I have just
enough time to explain it okay
so let's say you have a function f of X
Y which is x squared plus y squared plus
x squared y plus 4 find a global find
maximum global or absolute maxima minima
on the domain X Y where absolute value
of x is less than equal to 1/2 so value
of 1 less than equal to 1 okay
so the first step is to sketch the
domain stage which is very easy right so
this is just a square where the sides
are lines parallel to XY long axis at 1
and negative 1 so if 2 is to find the
boundary identify the boundary this is
the boundary and now we are going to
make a list of suspicious points or
points which are candidates for being
maximum minimum okay and this list will
include three kinds of points first a
points in the interior where both
partial derivatives are 0
what would I mean by interior interior
means everything except the boundary
okay so I have to calculate what is FX
and what is FY f X is 2x plus 2y and if
Y is 2y plus x squared right so
difficult to 0 and difficult to zero
since I'm running out of time let me
just go to the next step so you you
solve this equation it's very easy right
so this this is the first group of
points that you get on your list the
second group of points are points on the
boundary but which belongs to the smooth
part of the boundary to is smooth part
of the boundary
yes to 2x plus 2xy I'm sorry that's
right thank you all right
smooth part of the boundary what I mean
by this
well we exclude I mean maybe it's not a
good idea to say it's smooth but if it's
not like this let's just let us say
let's just call them components of the
boundary components of the boundary so
what I mean by components I mean this
for intervals so break your boundary
into four into pieces which can be
represented by nine 6x9 equation like
here here is like X is equal to 1 and Y
is between negative 1 and 1 so then
restrict your function receive your
function to this component it will
effectively become a function in one
variable solve the problem for this one
variable function okay one minute left
ok so let me give you an example say one
of the components is y equals 1 and X is
between negative 1 and 1 so I substitute
this y equal 1 into this formula and I
get f of X 1
is x squared plus one plus x squared
plus four so that's 2x squared plus five
right I got a function in one variable
on this interval find the local find the
absolute maximum of this of this
function on that interval okay so what
and then the same for each of this for
each other component and finally and
that's not all it would have been all it
would have been all if you didn't have
the corners but because you have corners
you have to include them because in
principle it could happen that the
maximum minimum is attained at the
corner so so look at include the corner
store so then you compile the list and
you evaluate the function and you choose
the one where the values maximum so
that's how you do it alright have a good
weekend